---
title: ✏️ 1. Writing in the Disciplines
author: Dr. Mani
date: 2025-09-06
category: Jekyll
layout: post
---

| 9/6 - 9/12 | **Writing in the Disciplines** <br/> 🔖 Complete [Module 1](/eng201-oer/jekyll/2025-08-02-w2.html){:target="_blank"}  | Tue: 1 Ques in #classroom <br/> Fri: 1 Answer in #classroom |


[ENG 201 Course Research LibGuides](https://classes.pace.edu/d2l/le/content/446377/viewContent/3345568/View)


•	ENG201 OER: 1. Introduction
•	ENG201 LibGuide (Home, Research Introduction)

Welcome to ENG 201: Writing in the Disciplines, a composition class offered by Pace University - Pleasantville! Our composition class is unique in that it aims to simultaneously teach you how to 1) conduct qualitative research and 2) enter the distinct discourse community of your discipline. 
ENG 201 builds on the writing skills you learned in ENG 110 and 120. You’ve already explored who you are as writers and how your writerly identities are shaped through participation in discourse communities. This course will help you develop argumentation and analytical skills and more advanced research skills, including documentation methods, the use of library and Internet resources, and the use of primary and secondary sources. In addition, it will teach you how to purposefully enact discipline-specific writing moves across writing and research tasks, demonstrating how disciplines are connected and how our academic specializations collide to improve our understanding of the world around us.
The pedagogical and assessment methods we use in our courses are probably unlike the stereotypes of writing instruction that you’re familiar with (butts in seats, pens to paper, expectations of mastery and assessments that are unrealistic, inequitable, and punitive). Our approaches and policies are designed to support learning as an ongoing, dynamic, trial-and-error process of emulation, experimentation, revision, reflection, and social collaboration (to name a few). 

WARNING
Tl;dr (too long, didn’t read) Summary: ENG 201 will teach you to emulate the disciplinary conventions of your field in preparation for future scholarly and professional texts you’ll write, using qualitative research as the vehicle for your learning. If you can apply discipline-specific moves across genres of writing, you can easily employ them in the writing tasks of your field.


What’s WID, Anyway?
As you learned in ENG 120: Critical Writing, each discipline possesses specific discourses, vocabularies, genre conventions, styles, organizational schema, and modes of communication. 


TIP
Watch this!
Check out [Purdue OWL’s "Writing is Discipline-Specific”](https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/graduate_writing/introduction_graduate_writing/writing_is_discipline%20specific.html) introduction and vidcast below:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Mao7p2kIkTc?si=I_HaSF2FAbOPYPl6" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Here are some textual features that vary across disciplines ([Palmer, 2020](https://oer.pressbooks.pub/roughwritersguide/chapter/chapter-1/)):


Title and header format
Introduction
Organization (paragraphs and sentences)
Signposts
Audience
Tone (especially level of formality)
Point-of-view (first, second, or third person)
Voice (active or passive)
Sections (use of headings and subheadings)
Images (photographs, diagrams, tables, graphs, etc.)
Discipline-specific vocabulary (jargon)
Sources (type, level of credibility)
Use of source information
Conclusion
Documentation style


**This notion is called writing in the disciplines, or WID.**

Each of the above features express something about what that field privileges about knowledge. For instance, different documentation styles emphasize different parts of knowledge-making. MLA parenthetical citations emphasize the author and page, focusing on authorial identity and textual location, while APA parenthetical citations include the year, emphasizing a timeline of knowledge. Social science papers, business reports, medical research papers, and engineering lab reports all include and organize information very differently (WAC Clearinghouse).
Additionally, readers in academic specializations are trained to read research sources through discipline-specific lenses, which allows them to assign more importance to certain ideas. These lenses can overlap to become interdisciplinary (Palmer, 2020).



•	Week 2 Video
•	OER: 2. How to Form a Research Question (Main Text)
•	ENG201 LibGuide (Strategic Searching, Locating Sources Online and at Pace)



•	OER: 2. How to Form a Research Question (Main Text)
•	ENG201 LibGuide (Strategic Searching, Locating Sources Online and at Pace)


•	ENG201 OER: 1. Introduction
•	ENG201 LibGuide (Home, Research Introduction)