---
title: ðŸ“¢ Announcements
author: Dr. Mani
date: 2025-07-31
category: Jekyll
layout: post
---

---

## ðŸ’Œ Week 0 - Welcome & Course Setup 

> ###### Note
> Please note that, as of 8/31/25, the course website is still being finalized and will go fully live before the second week of the course.
{: .block-danger }

Dear Students,

Welcome to Fall 2025 and ENG 201: Writing in the Disciplines! 

This is an asynchronous section. We don't have a physical classroom. Our online classroom is our Discord server, ENG201 Classroom, where we'll talk and write and work together. Like physical buildings you aren't familiar with, Discord might initially seem confusing, but it's pretty intuitive with a little exploration, is more low-key than Classes, and won't track you, steal your work, or accuse you of plagiarism like many AI-integrated learning management systems, including Classes.

In the first week of classes, you'll need to set yourself up for a successful semester by:

- Joining our Discord server (invitation link posted to [Classes\Content\Syllabus](https://classes.pace.edu){:target="_blank"}) and customizing your server profile, selecting your roles, and introducing yourself (for a quick guide to setting up Discord for this class, review the full [ðŸŽ® Discord Tutorial](/eng201-oer/others/discord){:target="_blank"})
- Reviewing the [ðŸ—“ï¸ Course Calendar](../){:target="_blank"} on our (this!) website and completing all the tasks listed under Week 1, namely:
 1. Completing [Module 0: Settling In](/eng201-oer/jekyll/2025-08-01-w1.html){:target="_blank"} on our (this!) course website by Fri
 2. Starting [Module 1: Writing in the Disciplines](/eng201-oer/jekyll/2025-08-02-w2.html){:target="_blank"}

After this first week, your typical weekly workflow will look like this:

1. Check the Course Calendar for an overview of the work due in that week
2. Begin the weekly module over the weekend before Tue and post your [question](../pages/assignments/){:target="_blank"} in #classroom on Discord
4. From the day you start the module to Fri, be sure to complete the "for your eyes only" practice exercises in the weekly modules, as well as any other writing assignments listed/described on the Calendar or module.
3. Finish the weekly module by Fri and post your [answer](../pages/assignments/){:target="_blank"} in #classroom on Discord

> ###### Note
> I've linked as much as possible in the Calendar, but you can also click the module's name in the sidebar menu, which will take you directly to the module page and reveal a list of submodules in the sidebar menu as well.
{: .block-tip }

This course works best when we all treat it like a space to chill and learn, not a space where you anxiously await judgment or avoid it by not communicating. We all have things to contribute, and we'll all get lost and trip up along the way. Nurturing your curiosity despite those mistakes, learning to productively, vocally engage with discomfort, is what writing and advocacy work is all about.

Can't wait to virtually meet you very soon!

ðŸš€ To infinity and beyond,   
Dr. Mani (alias: fhqwhgads)

P.S. Want a song to kick off each week, or music to fuel those writing sprints? Check out the [Playlist](../pages/playlists){:target="_blank"} page!