---
title: 📃 13. Presenting Primary Research
author: Dr. Mani
date: 2025-08-14
category: Jekyll
layout: post
mermaid: true
---

> ###### Are You Where You Should Be?
> This is Module 13: Presenting Primary Research, which should be completed between Sat Nov 29 - Fri Dec 5. If you haven't completed everything in Module 12, go back and finish all outstanding tasks now. **Don't forget to click on and review each resource in this guide.**
{: .block-danger }

# Goals and Checklist

- Understand the difference between narrativizing and interpreting primary research data and presenting it verbatim 
- Learn how to synthesize primary research data
- Practice relating primary and secondary research

To help with various access needs, including task identification and separation and advance notice, I'll include an abbreviated list of tasks at the top of each weekly module. You can check these items off, but your input won't be saved after you close this window. **You remain responsible for checking the Calendar and ensuring that you're completing everything in a timely fashion.**

<div style="margin:15px; line-height:1.8em;">
<div>
    <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
    <label for="chk">Complete any outstanding tasks from Module 12</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Read/watch the material in this module, including these external resources: </label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Write: </label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your question by Tue 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your answer by Fri 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Work on Draft 5</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Submit Draft 5 to Classes\Assignments by Sat 11:59PM</label>
</div>
</div>

> ###### Important!
> Don't forget to review your Draft 4 (Unit 2 Draft 2) scores along with the updated [General Feedback](https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/feedback/){:target="_blank"} page!
{:.block-danger}

Now that you've coded your interviews, you have a mountain of qualitative data to present in your Results section. You do not need to include it all! You should select the most significant codes and associated dialogue for presentation in the Results section. 

Begin with a hypothesis about why these particular themes surfaced in your interviewees’ responses. Don’t just copy and paste quotes, but include them within your own sentences (as the Writer’s Handbook demonstrates), establishing the speaker and the significance of the portion of dialogue around the quoted portion. 
You could use representative quotes, or quotes that represent the gist of the whole interview with one participant. 




Coding Transcribed Interviews and Blog/Vlog Analysis

At this stage, you should consider the connection between your codes. For example, codes such as anger, joy, frustration, etc. can be categorized as "emotion." In your Word doc, assign each code a specific color and highlight all passages accordingly. Again, emotion could be highlighted red for example. Develop three categories or themes from your conducted interviews.




Rarely will anyone get coding right the first time. Qualitative inquiry
demands meticulous attention to language and images, and deep
reflection on the researcher-constructed patterns and meanings of
human experience. Recoding can occur with a more attuned
perspective using first cycle methods again, while second cycle
methods describe those processes that might be employed during the
second (and third and possibly fourth, etc.) review of data. Punch
(2009), researching childhoods in Bolivia, describes how her codes,
categories, and themes (as she defines them) developed and
subdivided during her ethnographic fieldwork and concurrent data
analysis:
Saldana

# From Codes to Categories



Think back to the Writer's Handbook on paraphrasing, quoting, summarizing
https://2012books.lardbucket.org/books/writers-handbook/s26-03-quoting-paraphrasing-and-summa.html


GradCoach has a blog post on the [Results & Findings](https://gradcoach.com/qualitative-results-findings/) Chapter in the dissertation, but the information is relevant to undergraduate research, too. A key difference is that in the ENG 201 Qualitative Research Project, you will present and interpret the results in this one section.
For your Conclusion section, emulate discipline-specific writing moves by examining the conclusions of published peer-reviewed papers in your field (in your own literature review, perhaps!). How short or long are these conclusions? What are common transition phrases and signal words? Do these papers end with summary, gestures at the significance of research, or ideas for future research?


[How to Write the Discussion Section of an Academic Paper](https://www.raulpacheco.org/2019/04/how-to-write-the-discussion-section-of-an-academic-paper/){:target="_blank"}

STOP! Write
Review the sample student papers on Classes, in the Google Drive, and Yale’s repository. How are these Results sections written? Try the following:
Draft a template Results section, using one or more of the sentence and paragraph structures you see happening in these papers, leaving bracketed placeholders ([Placeholder]) in the places where your data will go.
Rewrite this template Results section using the writing moves of your discipline.
Replace any placeholders with the significant quotes and themes, along with your interpretations.

# Exit Writing

🥳 Congratulations on getting through this chapter! Don't forget to check the [Calendar](https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/){:target="_blank"} for the week's assignments, including your Tue question and Fri answer posts as well as any other assigned writing. Make sure to look ahead to future weeks as well to get a sense of when low- and high-stakes writing for Unit 3 is due.