---
title: 🔄️ 12. Argumentative Synthesis
author: Dr. Mani
date: 2025-08-13
category: Jekyll
layout: post
mermaid: true
---

> ###### Are You Where You Should Be?
> This is Module 12: Argumentative Synthesis, which should be completed between Sat Nov 22 - Fri Nov 28. If you haven't completed everything in Module 11, go back and finish all outstanding tasks now. **Don't forget to click on and review each resource in this guide.**
{: .block-danger }

# Goals and Checklist

- Review what makes an effective argument
- Learn about argumentative synthesis
- Practice strategies for argumentative synthesis 

To help with various access needs, including task identification and separation and advance notice, I'll include an abbreviated list of tasks at the top of each weekly module. You can check these items off, but your input won't be saved after you close this window. **You remain responsible for checking the Calendar and ensuring that you're completing everything in a timely fashion.**

<div style="margin:15px; line-height:1.8em;">
<div>
    <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
    <label for="chk">Complete any outstanding tasks from Module 11</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Read/watch the material in this module, including these external resources: </label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Write: </label>
</div>

<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Begin conducting interviews</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your coded interviews to #team by Sat 11:59PM</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Submit Draft 4 to Classes\Assignments by Wed 11:59PM</label>
</div>
</div>

Coding involves highlighting recurring words, phrases, or themes and identifying their frequency and significance. The goal is to capture meaningful patterns without overcoding large chunks of text. 


> ###### 🛑 Stop: Reread!
> Read Johnny Saldana's ["An Introduction to Codes and Coding"](https://www.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/upm-binaries/24614_01_Saldana_Ch_01.pdf){:target="_blank"} for a preview of the coding  
{:.block-tip}

Stop! Write:
Once you have interviewed your participants and transcribed your interviews, begin coding them. You can code words, phrases, and a full sentence but avoid coding an entire paragraph or response with the same code. Aim to have most of the text coded—i.e., few words should be unmarked by the end of your coding cycle. Try the following to get started:
What words keep reappearing across the interview answers from all the participants? (Use color coding or the comment function to mark them.) Use them to name some codes!
What is the significance of these codes and how frequently they appear?
What themes keep reappearing across the interview answers from all the participants? How might you briefly describe them? (Use color coding or the comment function to mark them.) Use them to name some codes!
What is the significance of these codes and how frequently they appear?



By now you should have conducted at least one of your interviews. If the interview is synchronous and oral, you must record it and transcribe it (create a word-for-word transcript).

When you finish conducting and transcribing your interviews, you'll organize this textual data using qualitative coding. Qualitative coding is a fancy name for pattern recognition. Copy all of the transcripts you have so far into one file and label each one with the interviewee’s name, the date of the interview, the platform (F2F, video conferencing technology, email), and length (time). 

Read them and note the patterns occurring across all three. Write down these patterns, naming them as specifically as possible -- these are your first cycle codes! First cycle codes are the big categories that will include more specific second cycle codes. 

Reference Saldana's piece on coding especially for the following! 

List your first cycle codes at the top of the document & keep them in mind as you go line by line and identify second cycle codes. Try to assign 1-2 second cycle codes to each response, giving them names that connect to your first cycle codes.

Create a color scheme for your second cycle  codes and color-code each line to connect lines to a specific second cycle theme theme. (You may use the comments function instead of color coding if that's easier.) 

Your coded transcripts might look like:

[First Cycle Code 1] Educational Classroom Issues

[List of Second Cycle Codes]

Green = Teaching from a lesson plan
Yellow = Managing behavior

[First Cycle Code 2] Emotional Labor and Mental Health

[List of Second Cycle Codes]
Red = Frustration with administration
Purple = Anxiety about workload
Blue = Supporting students through trauma
Etc.

INTERVIEW 1
Name: [Dialogue. Dialogue dialogue.]
Name: [Dialogue]
Etc.

Try to code every line -- they may be similarly or differently themed -- and post your prewriting as a reply to this thread!

Interviews or Blog/Vlog Analysis 

While students draft their literature reviews, they will conduct primary research in the form of interviews or blog/vlog analysis. Students will apply the questions crafted in Unit 1 in the form of three interviews or three blog/vlog entries. For the latter, students will review three selected blogs/vlogs and answer their interview questions from the material found in the post.  
Requirements:
Determine three possible interview participants;
Conduct and record three interviews (approximately 15 minutes each);
Transcribe interviews. 

Coding Transcribed Interviews and Blog/Vlog Analysis

After conducting and transcribing the interviews, students will code the content. Information is coded for the following reasons:
Codes in qualitative research are as important as numbers in a quantitative study;
Coding the qualitative data makes the messy scripts quantifiable and provides structure;
Your codes give you credibility as a writer with your audience;
Proper coding allows you to say with confidence that your findings truly represent the data you reviewed.

Coding is not looking over your interviews or media content once. The process is far more complex and requires several “passes” or steps taken to develop categories or themes;
Pass 1: In this step, you will review each interview line-by-line. While doing so, you will write summary statements in the margin of your paper--what you are noticing as you are reading, ideas and statements that directly relate to your research question. For example, you may notice a feeling of anger in the text (not from you). You should make a note of this. To do so, highlight the passage in your Word doc and select “comment.” Next, write in your thoughts. 
Pass 2: Once you are done with the first pass, you will now want to consider how your codes (for example anger) work together. This is known as developing categories or themes. 
At this stage, you should consider the connection between your codes. For example, codes such as anger, joy, frustration, etc. can be categorized as “emotion.” In your Word doc, assign each code a specific color and highlight all passages accordingly. Again, emotion could be highlighted red for example. 

Develop three categories or themes from your conducted interviews. 




# Exit Writing

🥳 Congratulations on getting through this chapter! Don't forget to check the [Calendar](https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/){:target="_blank"} for the week's assignments, including your Tue question and Fri answer posts as well as any other assigned writing. Make sure to look ahead to future weeks as well to get a sense of when low- and high-stakes writing for Unit 1 is due.

# Reference List for This Week's Resources