---
title: 🎬 15. The Final Cut
author: Dr. Mani
date: 2025-08-16
category: Jekyll
layout: post
mermaid: true
---

> ###### Are You Where You Should Be?
> This is Module 15: The Final Cut, which should be completed between Sat Dec 13 - Fri Dec 19. If you haven't completed everything in Module 15, go back and finish all outstanding tasks now. **Don't forget to click on and review each resource in this guide.**
{: .block-danger }

# Goals and Checklist

- Finalize Qualitative Research Project through global and local revision as well as proofreading tasks 

To help with various access needs, including task identification and separation and advance notice, I'll include an abbreviated list of tasks at the top of each weekly module. You can check these items off, but your input won't be saved after you close this window. **You remain responsible for checking the Calendar and ensuring that you're completing everything in a timely fashion.**

<div style="margin:15px; line-height:1.8em;">
<div>
    <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
    <label for="chk">Complete any outstanding tasks from Module 14</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Work on final revision</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Submit Final Draft to Classes\Assignments by Sat 11:59PM</label>
</div>
</div>

# Recommendations for the Final Week

Ideally, you 





# A Note about Final Course Grades

Important!
The information below is being provided 

The grading policy has been in the Syllabus provided at the beginning of the semester. To unpack here:

- The mid-semester grades did not account for work submitted past Week 9 (including some work submitted late)
- Mid-semester estimates were not guarantees; it's possible to receive a much higher or lower final course grade depending on your participation, use of feedback, and overall engagement since then
- Participation posts were not counted if submitted after the deadline for that week
- X scores were given for work that was not submitted at all, submitted after 7 days, and/or did not satisfy the assignment guidelines (failure to demonstrate class objectives, material for that phase, assignment requirements, or account for feedback)
- Participation in peer review was not counted after the deadline; as announced earlier in the semester, if a draft was posted and you did not peer review it (even if you didn't post your own), you did not participate in peer review. (If you posted a draft and no one else did, you were not penalized for missed peer review)
- There is no extra credit in this course
- I can't provide extensions on the final Qualitative Research Project (QRP)

I will attempt to have final QRPs scored and posted to Classes by next Wed and submitted to the registrar sometime next week.

# Good Luck and Goodbye!

It was a pleasure working with all of you this semester! I look forward to reading your work and 