---
title: 🖍️ 11. Qualitative Coding
author: Dr. Mani
date: 2025-08-12
category: Jekyll
layout: post
mermaid: true
---

> ###### Are You Where You Should Be?
> This is Module 11: Qualitative Coding, which should be completed between Sat Nov 15 - Fri Nov 21. If you haven't completed everything in Module 10, go back and finish all outstanding tasks now. **Don't forget to click on and review each resource in this guide.**
{: .block-danger }

# Goals and Checklist

- Learn about qualitative coding
- Identify different types of qualitative coding
- Develop strategies for coding interview data

To help with various access needs, including task identification and separation and advance notice, I'll include an abbreviated list of tasks at the top of each weekly module. You can check these items off, but your input won't be saved after you close this window. **You remain responsible for checking the Calendar and ensuring that you're completing everything in a timely fashion.**

<div style="margin:15px; line-height:1.8em;">
<div>
    <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
    <label for="chk">Complete any outstanding tasks from Module 10</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Read/watch the material in this module, including these external resources: </label>
</div>


<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Conduct #team workshop using the General Feedback form linked in this module</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Share the General Feedback Surveys you completed for each of your teammates in #team by Fri 11:59PM</label>
</div>

<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post 5 potential interview questions to #team by Sat 11:59PM</label>
</div>

<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Work on revision</label>
</div>

<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your question by Tue 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your answer by Fri 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Choose 2 potential blogs/vlogs by prominent members of your discipline</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your coded interviews to #team by Sat 11:59PM</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Work on Draft 4</label>
</div>
</div>


> ###### Important!
> After scores are posted, review the [General Feedback](https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/feedback/){:target="_blank"} page  
{:.block-danger}

> ###### "Cr" = "Credit" = Imperfect and in Need of Revision
> If you received a "Cr" that means you need to revise! If you received an "Nc," make sure to review all feedback/responses I've given you (and your peers) since Unit 1 began and reread the Unit 1 assignment guidelines *before* reaching out to me. My first question to you, no matter what, will always be to ask you to explain to me why you think you received the score you did, to assess your engagement with and understanding of the course content so far and figure out how best to help you with future assignments.
{: .block-warning }

Given my alt-grading system, I am slow to respond to panicked communications about a single score that suggests you aren't familiar with how grading is handled in this class. Please check the alt-grading system before contacting me with any questions about your score (and avoid asking "Why did I get this score?" Instead, if you'd like to discuss a given score, tell me why you think you got it, and what you think needs to be done differently moving forward to improve your score on future drafts).

Keep in mind that a single score on a single draft doesn't mean much right now, as this course is holistically graded and what's improved in future drafts could render a single grade obsolete. If you're really drifting away from the assignment, an "Nc" score now should signal to you to go over the guidelines and all the comments I've given everyone to date in #classroom Q&A chats (which I track and expect you to implement in future work). Regardless of score, everyone will be doing serious revision, and that's to be expected at this point.

Choose blog/vlog


Read Saldana https://www.sagepub.com/sites/default/files/upm-binaries/24614_01_Saldana_Ch_01.pdf



Qualitative research collects data through first-hand observation, such as interviews. For this class, students will conduct “structured interviews,” where they will ask all participants the same set of predetermined questions. Qualitative research is valuable because it allows the researcher to explore social interactions, provides an in-depth understanding of how people interact and create meaning, and clarifies “why” and “how” these experiences take shape.  

Develop five interview questions related to the selected research topic;
Organize questions in a logical sequence.



By now you should have conducted at least one of your interviews. If the interview is synchronous and oral, you must record it and transcribe it (create a word-for-word transcript).

When you finish conducting and transcribing your interviews, you'll organize this textual data using qualitative coding. Qualitative coding is a fancy name for pattern recognition. Copy all of the transcripts you have so far into one file and label each one with the interviewee’s name, the date of the interview, the platform (F2F, video conferencing technology, email), and length (time). 

Read them and note the patterns occurring across all three. Write down these patterns, naming them as specifically as possible -- these are your first cycle codes! First cycle codes are the big categories that will include more specific second cycle codes. 

Reference Saldana's piece on coding especially for the following! 

List your first cycle codes at the top of the document & keep them in mind as you go line by line and identify second cycle codes. Try to assign 1-2 second cycle codes to each response, giving them names that connect to your first cycle codes.

Create a color scheme for your second cycle  codes and color-code each line to connect lines to a specific second cycle theme theme. (You may use the comments function instead of color coding if that's easier.) 

Your coded transcripts might look like:

[First Cycle Code 1] Educational Classroom Issues

[List of Second Cycle Codes]

Green = Teaching from a lesson plan
Yellow = Managing behavior

[First Cycle Code 2] Emotional Labor and Mental Health

[List of Second Cycle Codes]
Red = Frustration with administration
Purple = Anxiety about workload
Blue = Supporting students through trauma
Etc.

INTERVIEW 1
Name: [Dialogue. Dialogue dialogue.]
Name: [Dialogue]
Etc.

Try to code every line -- they may be similarly or differently themed -- and post your prewriting as a reply to this thread!

Interviews or Blog/Vlog Analysis 

While students draft their literature reviews, they will conduct primary research in the form of interviews or blog/vlog analysis. Students will apply the questions crafted in Unit 1 in the form of three interviews or three blog/vlog entries. For the latter, students will review three selected blogs/vlogs and answer their interview questions from the material found in the post.  
Requirements:
Determine three possible interview participants;
Conduct and record three interviews (approximately 15 minutes each);
Transcribe interviews. 

Coding Transcribed Interviews and Blog/Vlog Analysis

After conducting and transcribing the interviews, students will code the content. Information is coded for the following reasons:
Codes in qualitative research are as important as numbers in a quantitative study;
Coding the qualitative data makes the messy scripts quantifiable and provides structure;
Your codes give you credibility as a writer with your audience;
Proper coding allows you to say with confidence that your findings truly represent the data you reviewed.

Coding is not looking over your interviews or media content once. The process is far more complex and requires several “passes” or steps taken to develop categories or themes;
Pass 1: In this step, you will review each interview line-by-line. While doing so, you will write summary statements in the margin of your paper--what you are noticing as you are reading, ideas and statements that directly relate to your research question. For example, you may notice a feeling of anger in the text (not from you). You should make a note of this. To do so, highlight the passage in your Word doc and select “comment.” Next, write in your thoughts. 
Pass 2: Once you are done with the first pass, you will now want to consider how your codes (for example anger) work together. This is known as developing categories or themes. 
At this stage, you should consider the connection between your codes. For example, codes such as anger, joy, frustration, etc. can be categorized as “emotion.” In your Word doc, assign each code a specific color and highlight all passages accordingly. Again, emotion could be highlighted red for example. 

Develop three categories or themes from your conducted interviews. 




# Exit Writing

🥳 Congratulations on getting through this chapter! Don't forget to check the [Calendar](https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/){:target="_blank"} for the week's assignments, including your process reflection and #team posts as well as any other assigned writing. Make sure to look ahead to future weeks as well to get a sense of when low- and high-stakes writing for the rest of Unit 1 is due.

# Reference List for This Week's Resources

Shane Abrams (adapted by Liz Delf, Rob Drummond, Kristy Kelly) | ["Concepts and Strategies for Revision"](https://open.oregonstate.education/goodargument/chapter/concepts-strategies-for-revision/){:target="_blank"} 
Richard Straub | ["Responding &mdash; Really Responding &mdash; to Other Students' Writing"](/eng201-oer/assets/pdfs/straub_responding_to_student_writing.pdf){:target="_blank"} 