---
title: 💯 5. Habituating Feedback
author: Dr. Mani
date: 2025-08-06
category: Jekyll
layout: post
---

> ###### Are You Where You Should Be?
> This is Module 5: Habituating Feedback, which should be completed between Sat Oct 4 - Fri Oct 10. If you haven't completed everything in Module 4, go back and finish all outstanding tasks now. **Don't forget to click on and review each resource in this guide.**
{: .block-danger }

# Goals and Checklist

- Learn how to conduct peer review
- Improve your ability to read college assignments rhetorically
- Learn to read feedback rhetorically
- Refine research hypotheses

To help with various access needs, including task identification and separation and advance notice, I'll include an abbreviated list of tasks at the top of each weekly module. You can check these items off, but your input won't be saved after you close this window. **You remain responsible for checking the Calendar and ensuring that you're completing everything in a timely fashion.**

<div style="margin:15px; line-height:1.8em;">
<div>
    <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
    <label for="chk">Complete any outstanding tasks from Module 4</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Read/watch the material in this module, including these external resources: Straub's "Responding &mdash; Really Responding &mdash; to Other Students’ Writing," Abrams, "Concepts and Strategies for Revision"</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your draft and process reflection by Tue 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post answers to General Feedback Survey questions for each of your teammates to #team by Fri 11:59PM
  </label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Work on revision</label>
</div>
</div>

# Redefining Revision

You've probably been taught that revision means changing words, fixing punctuation, and making other grammatical and mechanical edits, but this is just one of three tiers:

**Global revision**: Ideas (like your research hypotheses), your approach, selected sources, organization, audience(s) being addressed
**Local revision**: Sentence fluency, sentence pacing, word choice
**Proofreading**: Grammar, mechanics, formatting

> ###### Important!
> Your higher-order concerns (HOCs), i.e. top-level concerns, are global revision issues. Local revision and proofreading are lower-order concerns (LOCs), i.e. the very last thing you'll do this semester.
{:.block-danger}

Remember, if your research hypotheses, sources, approach, or structure need revision, then grammar and mechanics don't matter &mdash; you're just going to end up rewriting that sentence anyway.

It's also important to remember that the spirit of inquiry is the heart of the academic enterprise. Abrams (2022) reminds us that "revision isn't just about polishing &mdash; it's about seeing your piece from a new angle, with 'fresh eyes.'" It's easy to get so close to a draft we've recently written that we lose sight of how to improve it. It might even feel like we've done everything there is to do for the draft. We have to learn to see our own work from a different perspective to improve it. 

https://open.oregonstate.education/goodargument/chapter/concepts-strategies-for-revision/



> ###### 🛑 Stop: Read!
> To prepare for this week's workshop, as well as revising on your own, read 

Richard Straub's ["Responding &mdash; Really Responding &mdash; to Other Students' Writing"](/eng201-oer/assets/pdfs/straub_responding_to_student_writing.pdf){:target="_blank"}
{: .block-tip }



> ###### 🛑 Stop: Read!
> Revisit the research questions/hypotheses you drafted in Module 3 and try asking "what kind?" of every word and phrase, like I demonstrated above. Rewrite your research questions/hypotheses more specifically by (tentatively) answering the "what kind?" questions you pose, referring to your preliminary research to help you formulate your answers.
{:.block-tip}

# 





# Workshop Instructions









> ###### Don't Worry If Your Peers Are Late!
> You aren't responsible for reading any papers that weren't posted to #team by Sunday, but if you post your draft late, you're still responsible for reviewing the other essays by Friday. 

You will submit your Phase 1 Draft 2 to the dropbox on Classes by 5pm on Friday. The peer review forms — one for each of your peers — are due by 5pm on Friday as well just to give you extra time in case you need it, but you should complete them as early as you are able.
{:.block-danger}



https://www.academia.edu/64600333/The_Curious_Writer_6e_Chapter_1


https://pressbooks.calstate.edu/navigating/chapter/exigence-and-rhetorical-situation/



This week, you'll asynchronously workshop each other's drafts in your #team channel. 

Now that you've read 

Straub's "Responding &mdash; Really Responding &mdash; to Other Students' Writing" and will work on peer review with your workshops on Slack. By Sunday, I’ll have randomly assigned you into workshop groups by inviting you to a specific workshop channel on Slack. Accept the invitation and coordinate with your peers in that channel regarding sharing and reading each other’s work.
I expect you to post your preliminary drafts — NOT the ones you submit to me — on Slack in your #workshop channel by 10:00am at the latest on Wednesday. You will spend class time reading and reviewing each other’s essays, in the manner that Straub describes. For each student paper you read, you will complete one of the Phase 1 Draft 1 Peer Review Forms posted under on D2L Classes under Week 3. All of your peers’ papers must be read and peer review forms completed by 5:00pm on Friday at the latest, but it’s recommended you complete them earlier than that. You don’t have to post them; as soon as you hit submit on the Google Form, I’ll automatically get a copy.
In addition to Straub’s suggestions, here are some structured instructions for conducting peer review.
Instructions for Peer Review
Staub’s essay describes an engaged form of peer review that asks you to read like a reader, not an editor or professor. Consider working in a Google Doc for ease of commenting through marginalia and end notes, and for seeing how other peers in your group respond to the same piece.
Make time in Week 3 for drafting and for peer review, which will include reading, commenting, and collaboratively completing a Phase 1 Draft 1 Peer Review Worksheet.
Out of respect for your team members, please post your drafts by Wednesday so everyone has time to read and review before the end of the week.
Here are the general instructions.
1.	Post a link or file of your essay to your Discord #team channel. If you post a Google Doc make sure you’ve enabled sharing permissions; there’s a Google Docs onboarding doc in welcome and rules if you need it. Don’t talk about your essays! First, read without commenting.
2.	Read and make marginalia using the Comments feature. Underline/highlight what you think the claim is, make notes about what you think the writer’s aims are, etc.
3.	Under Worksheets and Handouts on Classes, click the folder that belongs to your Team. Complete the “P1 Draft 1” worksheet posted in that folder. There is one Google Doc in which all of you will type your comments, using the format indicated in the instructions in that sheet. (For: Writer’s name, From: From From)
4.	Your team members and me will have access to that Doc.
5.	After receiving feedback, read what your teammates wrote, and discuss any questions you have together as a group. You may want to ask questions about what their comments mean, how they suggest enacting those comments, collaboratively write your way towards enacting those comments, and so on.
6.	After you all finish the worksheet, write a brief reflective note (~500 words) at the end of your draft, like a short letter to me, summarizing the feedback you were given by your peers, identifying what you prioritized for revision and why, explaining which assignment parameters you think you met and which you think you need to keep striving towards. You may also reflect on the reasoning behind the decisions you made in revising your draft for submission to me: any regrets or difficulties you dealt with, your attitude towards the assignment and feedback, any burdens of college or life that crept into your work, and so on. Include this letter at the end of your draft — in other words, you’ll submit it as one file on Classes by the deadline.
Missing peer review counts as missed work, and impacts your final course grade, so make sure to complete peer review by the deadline. You will not be penalized if you don’t read drafts posted too late. I’ll pay attention to when y’all post your drafts and will make note of those who actively participate in peer review and those who don’t.
If you have questions or want to meet with me, I’m available for coffee chats and DMs.
Happy writing and reviewing and I look forward to reading your drafts!

https://open.oregonstate.education/goodargument/chapter/concepts-strategies-for-revision/


Here are some resources to help demystify the process of reading scholarly articles, evaluating sources for incorporation in ENG 201 papers, and practicing disciplinary writing techniques. Additionally, academic readers have to specialize in reading research sources through discipline-specific lenses, so they can more easily assign more importance to certain ideas. 

In order to write in the disciplines, you have to prioritize reading in the disciplines as well. 


•	Week 4 Video
•	OER: Appendix A (re: your discipline)

This chapter includes a table that lists disciplines, distinctive features, and demands and strategies of disciplinary literacy.

https://2012books.lardbucket.org/books/writers-handbook/s26-appendix-b-a-guide-to-research.html


# Exit Writing

🥳 Congratulations on getting through this chapter! Don't forget to check the [Calendar](https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/){:target="_blank"} for the week's assignments, including your Tue question and Fri answer posts as well as any other assigned writing. Make sure to look ahead to future weeks as well to get a sense of when low- and high-stakes writing for Unit 1 is due.

# Reference List for This Week's Resources

Richard Straub | ["Responding &mdash; Really Responding &mdash; to Other Students' Writing"](/assets/pdfs/straub_responding_to_student_writing.pdf){:target="_blank"}
