---
title: 📚 8. Conceptual Saturation
author: Dr. Mani
date: 2025-08-09
category: Jekyll
layout: post
mermaid: true
---

> ###### Are You Where You Should Be?
> This is Module 8: Conceptual Saturation, which should be completed between Sat Oct 25 - Fri Oct 31. If you haven't completed everything in Module 7, go back and finish all outstanding tasks now. **Don't forget to click on and review each resource in this guide.**
{: .block-danger }

# Goals and Checklist

- Create and fill out a conceptual saturation dump (CSD) Excel spreadsheet
- Understand the purpose of creating an annotated bibliography   

To help with various access needs, including task identification and separation and advance notice, I'll include an abbreviated list of tasks at the top of each weekly module. You can check these items off, but your input won't be saved after you close this window. **You remain responsible for checking the Calendar and ensuring that you're completing everything in a timely fashion.**

<div style="margin:15px; line-height:1.8em;">
<div>
    <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
    <label for="chk">Complete any outstanding tasks from Module 7</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Read/watch the material in this module, including these external resources: Carillo, "Working with Sources," Pacheco-Vega, "Conceptual Synthesis Dump," The Research Methods Consortium's "Annotating Sources"</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your process reflection by Tue 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your question by Tue 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your answer by Fri 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your Annotated Bibliography in #team by Sat 11:59PM</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Work on Draft 3</label>
</div>
</div>


As we 

# Evaluating Sources

Once you locate a source you think you might use, your first task is evaluating it to ensure it provides "good" information. This is true whether you're considering a peer-reviewed article or a popular publication. 

Different criteria will be more or less important depending on 
your situation or need

> ###### 🛑 Stop: Review!
> Review the [IF I APPLY](https://libguides.marshall.edu/IFIAPPLY){:target="_blank"} page and the [Evaluating Information - Applying the CRAAP Test](https://guides.lib.uchicago.edu/ld.php?content_id=77584250)
{:.block-tip}.




Every time we read something, there's really three readings: one that's personal, one that's rhetorical, and one that is both personal and rhetorical (often colloquially called a "binocular reading" because it's like looking through a pair of binoculars). 

Complete instructions for the annotated bibliography assignment are included in the Course Book > Assignments > Writespaces, but generally speaking, annotated bibliographies include a summary of the article and an assessment of its relevance and usefulness for your research project. 

The Says/Does handout on Classes might help you figure out how to briefly summarize significant paragraphs in an important article.

Annotated Bibliographies inherently respond to disciplinary conventions, as they can be roughly divided into two categories—humanities/social sciences and empirical research—with different informational priorities: 


nd Chapter 5: Working with Sources
Carillo


https://uta.pressbooks.pub/advancedresearchmethodsinsw/chapter/6-4-annotating-sources/




**Humanities and Social Sciences** | **Scientific and Empirical Research**
Author, genre, primary argument (1-2 sentences) | The problem or need (known as exigence) that prompted the author’s article (1 sentence)
A brief evaluation of the source's evidence and rhetoric (2-3 sentences) | An explanation of the source's relevance and usefulness for your project (2-3 sentences)
Author, author's credentials, type of research (qualitative or quantitative) and topic of study (1 sentence) | The problem or gap that the author is trying to address (1 sentence)
The research design (variables, data collection methods, ethical or lab issues) (1-2 sentences) | The author’s results and their significance for the research topic and field (1-2 sentences)
The credibility of the study (biases, validity of methods, ethical or lab issues) (1-2 sentences) | The source’s relevance and usefulness for your research (1-2 sentences)




[Synthesizing different bodies of work in your literature review: The Conceptual Synthesis Excel Dump (CSED) technique](https://www.raulpacheco.org/2016/06/synthesizing-different-bodies-of-work-in-your-literature-review-the-conceptual-synthesis-excel-dump-technique/){:target="_blank"}

Annotated Bib

To help you with the Lit Review, you’ll write an Annotated Bibliography that organizes your secondary research, which you've been doing through Google Scholar and Pace library databases. 

Your sources must be peer-reviewed scholarship. Check out this Pace LibGuide for info on what a peer-reviewed article  and this NC State interactive guide on the parts of a scholarly article. To make sure you can use a source, evaluate it using the tests here. 

The Annotated Bibliography includes 6 secondary sources. You should close-read and summarize each article in 1 paragraph, using the course materials to guide you. Take notes on major themes connecting the articles, so you can group them according to thematic connection. 

Your Annotated Bibliography should include:

Two sections, with 3 article summaries in each section (no repeat uses)
Each summary should describe the article’s particular thesis and findings
Subheading titles for each section, named for the 2 major themes connecting the 3 articles in that section
Correctly formatted citations using MLA or APA

Your Annotated Bibliography entries should look like:

Category Title

CITATION (formatted in MLA or APA)
Article summary (1 paragraph)
What do the specific arguments and conclusions in this article tell you about your research question?

CITATION.
etc.

You’ll also include an “Unbibliography” with your Annotated Bibliography: A list (doesn’t need to be formatted) of 3-5 sources you considered using but ultimately rejected, with a brief (250-500 word) reflection on why you considered them and why you decided against them.

Try to complete all the entries but if you can only do 3 Annotated Bibliography entries (2 in 1 section, 1 in the other) and 2 Unbibliography entries, that's OK, but I'll have less to comment on.

Please post your prewriting activity as 1-2 replies or an attached file to this topic!