---
title: 🤔 2. Grounded Theory for (All) Research
author: Dr. Mani
date: 2025-08-03
category: Jekyll
layout: post
---

> ###### Are You Where You Should Be?
> This is Module 2: Grounded Theory for (All) Research, which should be completed between Sat Sept 13 - Fri Sept 19. If you haven't completed everything in Module 1, go back and finish all outstanding tasks now. **Don't forget to click on and review each resource in this guide.**
{: .block-danger }

# Goals and Checklist

- Learn about grounded theory
- Conduct 3 rounds of preliminary research
- Begin developing research questions for your project 

To help with various access needs, including task identification and separation and advance notice, I'll include an abbreviated list of tasks at the top of each weekly module. You can check these items off, but your input won't be saved after you close this window. **You remain responsible for checking the Calendar and ensuring that you're completing everything in a timely fashion.**

<div>
    <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
    <label for="chk">⏰ Complete any outstanding tasks from Module 2</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">📖 Read/watch the material in this module, including these external resources: </label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">📚 Start the process of preliminary research for the qualitative research project</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">✍️ Write: list of preliminary research sources (authors, titles, journals, not just links) you may return to</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">📲 Post your question by Tue 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">📲 Post your answer by Fri 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>

# What's Grounded Theory and Why Should I Care?

Grounded theory the name for an approach to doing research and building theory "from the ground up" &mdash; meaning "from the data." Grounded theory research begins with data in the form of secondary research (library research) or primary research (fieldwork). The grounded theory researcher takes an active, interpretive role in approaching their secondary research with few to no predetermined thoughts and no preexisting literature review. In our class, you're this grounded theory researcher; your experience influences the research questions that are asked and the hypothesis you come up with. 


You'll be collecting data and conducting analysis by categorizing evidence and figuring out the relationships between these categories &mdash; "from the ground up," starting this week in a casual, cursory fashion, with preliminary research meant to familiarize you with contemporary discourse around current problems, or tensions, of your field, 

Because your epxerience is a valuable part of grounded theory research, reflecting on your process of doing and writing research is important!

Later in the course, you'll be asked to write "process reflections" when we do workshop, 


It isn't mean developing a grand theory at the level of established philosophers. Rather, it's about looking for patterns in evidence that you collect from articles you read, so you can see 

# 




# Forming Research Questions

Barroga & Matanguihan (2022) describe the development of research questions as:

> a process based on knowledge of current trends, cutting-edge studies, and technological advances in the research field. Excellent research questions are focused and require a comprehensive literature search and in-depth understanding of the problem being investigated. Initially, research questions may be written as descriptive questions which could be developed into inferential questions. These questions must be specific and concise to provide a clear foundation for developing hypotheses. Hypotheses are more formal predictions about the research outcomes.

Researchers tend to ask discipline-related kinds of questions, leading to a variety of scholarly inquiries within one research topic. Palmer (2020) offers the example of "renewable resources" and poses multiple discipline-specific questions:

- *Business, Accounting, Economics*: "Which renewable resources offer economically feasible solutions to energy issues?"
- *History*: "When did humans switch from the use of renewable resources to nonrenewable resources?"
- *Environmental Studies*: "How can algae be developed at a pace and in the quantities needed to be a viable main renewable resource?"
- *Geography*: "Which U.S. states are best suited to being key providers of renewable natural resources?"

Like many scholars, you'll need to combine those kinds of questions with the particular asks of the Qualitative Research Project for ENG 201. This means you'll need to do some reading and writing simultaneously!




How to Map Debates

Dr. Raul Pacheco-Vega [How to Map Out Debates in the Scholarly Literature](https://www.raulpacheco.org/2025/09/how-to-map-out-debates-in-the-scholarly-literature/){:target="_blank"}


# AIC Method

Dr. Raul Pacheco-Vega describes the AIC technique in [Finding the Most Relevant Information in a Paper When Reading: A Three-Step Method](https://www.raulpacheco.org/2017/01/finding-the-most-relevant-information-in-a-paper-when-reading-a-three-step-method/){:target="_blank"}


PARAPHRASE

You will encounter and learn much more information than you will convey in your final paper. Background information will enrich your research paper but should not bog it down in trivia. For example, if you were doing a paper on Hildegaard of Bingen, you should know that she was born into a noble family in Germany in 1098 and entered a hermitage at the age of eight and became a Benedictine Abbess. This information will help you contextualize her work in your own mind but your research paper should not be a simple recitation of these facts. Your research question should take you beyond the common knowledge found in encyclopedias, but without that  common knowledge your research will lack a solid foundation.

TIP - Doing the work of establishing in advance that your topic is viable will help you write a strong research paper and avoid a change of topic at the last minute, saving you time and agony in the long run. Make sure your topic is viable by keeping in mind its appropriateness to the assignment and its controversial nature, as well as the availability of adequate sources.

What follows is a list of resources that you may find useful for doing preliminary research in the field of Religious Studies. Keep in mind the type of information that you will need based on your preliminary topic and where your topic falls in the topic pyramid. Remember that the pyramid is a continuum rather than a series of discrete stages, so your topic likely will draw on both columns for some resources.


> ###### 🛑 Stop: Watch
> Watch this video, ["Picking Your Topic is Research!"](https://www.lib.ncsu.edu/videos/picking-your-topic-is-research){:target="_blank"} produced by NC State University Libraries, which walks you through the process of choosing a topic using research, and using research to test the viability of your chosen topic.
{:.block-tip}




> ###### 🛑 Stop: Watch
> Watch the below video, "Basics of Literature Review Searching (ENG 201)," produced by Pace Library, which contains tips on conducting effective database searches. 
{:.block-tip}

<iframe width="860" height="515" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/PEggCnI7hjQ?si=-bBOfmn25kEnsrTJ" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>



# Conducting (Preliminary) Secondary Research

ENG 201 Strategic Searching

For tips on using Boolean operators (and, or, "", intext, intitle, etc.), check Illinois University's guide: https://guides.library.illinois.edu/c.php?g=563215&p=3877584



Consider your keywords, and keep trying different synonyms!


Qualitative research questions are frequently revisited, reviewed, and revised. The central claim is preceded by a statement describing a phenomenon, after which it broadly explores a complex set of factors surrounding that phenomenon. If primary research (like interviews) is used, it is used to present participant perspectives. 
These questions can do one or more of the following:
Contextual research: Identify and describe a phenomenon
Descriptive research: Describe a phenomenon
Explanatory research: Examine a phenomenon or analyze the reasons or relationships between phenomena
Exploratory research: Consider unknown dimensions of a phenomenon
Ethnographic research: Build on existing literature
Case study research: Describe and explore a particular case study
Qualitative research questions may be posed without referencing existing literature. These questions are often included in research papers as problem statements, the hypothesis you arrive at by trying to answer that question, signaling to the reader that the paper will explain how the writer (you!) arrived at that hypothesis.
Barroga and Matanguihan (2022) offer some examples that demonstrate the above in respect to the ENG 201 Qualitative Research Project, such as:
“What are the experiences of nurses working night shifts in healthcare during the COVID-19 pandemic?”
“What factors affect the mental health of psychologists during the COVID-19 pandemic?”
We can extrapolate other examples, like:
How has the so-called “quiet quitting” phenomenon actually affected employment rates in business?
What are the forms of disrespect and abuse experienced by women criminal justice attorneys and how does this impact employment retention or substance abuse?
How have changes in research protocols around human subjects improved (or not) human subject research in anthropological research?
And so on!
This is also called a discipline narrative. This video, created by Jessica Kiebler at Pace University Library, summarizes how to embark on posing research questions and transforming them into problem statements.
This might also be a good time to review the sample drafts written by a Pace student in an ENG 201 section, posted to Classes > Content > Sample Student Portfolio. It might also help to skim Yale’s repository of model student papers across the disciplines, a resource referenced later in this OER as well. 



Consider 3-5 of the most persistent controversies, questions, and debates in the field. You’ll need to do preliminary research for this, which means skimming a number of article titles, abstracts, and keywords to get a general sense of the ongoing conversations in your discipline. Your writing task for the Qualitative Research Project is to uncover and examine ongoing conversations about problematic issues that members of the field are engaged in.
Here’s a suggested workflow:
Review 50 article titles, taking notes on emergent themes, titles, and keywords.
Refine your search with these notes and review 25 article titles, taking notes on any changes you notice across themes, titles, and keywords. 
Refine your search again with these notes and review 15 titles and abstracts. What themes are clearly emerging now? What controversies, debates, and problems appear to plague members of the field (e.g., overwork and burnout, lack of emotional support, low salaries, frequent demoralization, identity bias and microaggressions, etc.)
Refine your search one last time and review 10 titles, keywords, and abstracts. Using these texts, write one paragraph 
Dr. Mani’s Scribe tutorial offers a step-by-step guide to conducting preliminary research as well.


## Demo: Preliminary Research, Round 2!

In this example, since I'm a disabled professor, I'll model one way to narrow down my general interest in 

 about being disabled in the academy. Pay attention to how I experiment with my keywords.

I've forgotten, however, to be specific about both halves of the research focus: I've been playing with the issue faced by employees in the field (disability/chronic illness, in this case) but I forgot to be specific about the field itself! Let's try this again, with increased specificity.


I've bolded the parts that come from keywords turned up during my preliminary research, in titles, abstracts, and article arguments. 



Preliminary Research 
https://scribehow.com/viewer/Preliminary_Research_Round_2__TBzDUHU1Q1SQ9aJdiXf-jA?referrer=knowledge-page


This week, you should do the same thing. Try the following steps:
Experiment with one set of keywords. Skim ~50 article titles and Google Scholar abbreviated summaries. Write down phrases and words that feel useful. Make sure to focus on the issue faced by employees in your major/career in one part of your search string, and in the other part of the search string, focus on the specific major/career or even subfield.
Narrow your keywords using the words/phrases you've jotted down. Skim ~25 article titles, abbreviated summaries, and abstracts (which will show up when you open these articles). Write down phrases, words, and keywords that feel useful.
Narrow your keywords again, and rinse and repeat.
Keep doing the above until you're down to 1K results or fewer, and then select some articles that you think will help you figure out what you want to focus on. Skim---and I do mean skim---5-10 of these articles. You're looking for their primary claim/thesis/argument.
Using what you've learned, how can you contribute to the conversation? In the example above, I might come away with the following, using Dolmage's Academic Ableism, Brown & Leigh's articles, and a couple more to explain some background and form a set of research questions:

"Disabled writing instructors, especially those with invisible disabilities, are under-represented in academia due to the risks of disclosure (the possibility of being fired or discriminated against) and a lack of architectural accessibility. Fibromyalgic writing instructors suffer from incurable chronic pain that isn't always visible, and writing itself is a painful activity even with ergonomic setups. My research questions right now are: How do fibromyalgic instructors negotiate access in the writing classroom through disclosure and accessible pedagogy? How do they use accessible pedagogies to accommodate themselves and their students? What do their strategies tell us about ableism in academia, especially writing studies?"

Eventually, I'll offer a potential answer to those questions, once I've really read the research, and that answer will be my research hypothesis.
I really want to ask why academia is ableist, and why disabled instructors can't be treated better, but these aren't research questions that I can reasonably, thoroughly address in even 20 pages. It's important to use preliminary research on Google Scholar to make it sound like you are coming up with your research questions from existing scholarship, and not out of thin air, just personal experience, or a random Google search.
Use this week's readings and videos to help you further understand how to formulate research questions.


# Exit Writing

🥳 Congratulations on getting through this chapter! Don't forget to check the [Calendar](https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/){:target="_blank"} for the week's assignments, including your Tue question and Fri answer posts as well as any other assigned writing. Make sure to look ahead to future weeks as well to get a sense of when low- and high-stakes writing for Unit 1 is due.

# Reference List for This Week's Resources

Edward Barroga, Glafera Janet Matanguihan (2022) | [A Practical Guide to Writing Quantitative and Qualitative Research Questions and Hypotheses in Scholarly Articles](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9039193/){:target="_blank"}
NC State University Libraries | ["Picking Your Topic is Research!"](){:target="_blank"}
Pace Library | [Basics of Literature Review Searching](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MNGWA5r9yyU){:target="_blank"}
Pace LibGuides | [ENG 201: Strategic Searching](https://libguides.pace.edu/eng201/searching){:target="_blank"}





> ###### Practice: Carillo's Practice Exercises
> As you read the articles your preliminary research uncovers, practice each of the reading strategies Carillo described in the book chapter you read last week. Try previewing to 

Try previewing the text (scanning for elements like title; author; abstract, structure) to decide if it applies to your field and suits your purpose;  

{:.block-tip}




Module 3: 
Complete after finishing assigned readings (incl any linked mtl & Your Turn ex in OER)

Begin thinking about your Research Intro of the Qualitative Research Project by exploring the convos in your field around particular social, economic, or personal issues faced by its employees. 

A good way to do this is to look up professional associations in your career field and do preliminary research on Google Scholar using keywords and search strings as outlined in the ENG 201 OER -- refer to the Pace LibGuide for search string tips! Be as specific as possible: e.g., "bioinformatics" is a more meaningful search than "computer science"; "neonatal intensive care unit nurse" is stronger than "nursing"; "racial inequity in salary" is stronger than "salary difference." Change your keywords several times and see how the results change, and try the preliminary research strategies suggested in the OER.

Create a file for this preliminary research (you can call it "Research Dump") and copy-paste the authors/article titles and links that seem most useful right now into it. As you skim the titles that come up in your searches and the abstracts and first paragraphs of these articles, take notes in this document too.

Now, post your keywords and search strings here, along with a paragraph based on your preliminary research that: 

Identifies and describes the discipline you’re studying (1 sentence)
Identifies and describes some of the problems at large in your discipline (2 sentences)
Based on your preliminary research, what have scholars writing about the discipline already said about these issues? (2 sentences)
What tentative research questions, based on this preliminary research, do you have at present? Phrase them like this: "How does [the problem] affect workers in your discipline? Why does it appear and affect them like that? According to the literature, how do workers seem to cope with it?"