---
title: ♻️ 10. Feedback and Recursive Revision
author: Dr. Mani
date: 2025-08-11
category: Jekyll
layout: post
mermaid: true
---

> ###### Are You Where You Should Be?
> This is Module 10: Feedback and Recursive Revision, which should be completed between Sat Nov 8 - Fri Nov 14. If you haven't completed everything in Module 9, go back and finish all outstanding tasks now. **Don't forget to click on and review each resource in this guide.**
{: .block-danger }

# Goals and Checklist

- Practice reading feedback rhetorically
- Refine literature review
- Develop strategies for conducting qualitative interviews 

To help with various access needs, including task identification and separation and advance notice, I'll include an abbreviated list of tasks at the top of each weekly module. You can check these items off, but your input won't be saved after you close this window. **You remain responsible for checking the Calendar and ensuring that you're completing everything in a timely fashion.**

<div style="margin:15px; line-height:1.8em;">
<div>
    <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
    <label for="chk">Complete any outstanding tasks from Module 9</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Read/watch the material in this module, including these external resources: Dronkers' Tedx Talk "How to Interview (Almost) Anyone," Harvard's "Strategies for Qualitative Interviews," Joanna Chrzanowska's demonstrations of qualitative interviews (with mistakes and how it should be done)</label>
</div>
<div>
  <input type="checkbox" name="uchk">
  <label for="uchk">Post your process reflection by Fri 11:59PM (see <a href="https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/pages/assignments/">Assignments</a>)</label>
</div>




💻 Choose 3 primary sources (interviewees, vlogs by prominent members of your discipline) where at least 1 source is someone you interview yourself <br /> 📧 Email your selected interviewee(s) <br/> 🖊️ Work on revision <br/> ⏰ Submit late work still eligible for grace period | **Tue**: Process Reflection in #team <br/> **Fri**: General Feedback Survey for each teammate in #team <br/> **Sat**: 5 Interview Qs in #team |



You should begin thinking about who you might want to interview. Your interviewees should be knowledgeable about your field of study or the research questions you have to some degree. You’ll need to interview 3 people for this project, but remember that not everyone will have the time for an interview. In case a potential interviewee can’t do it, make a shortlist of 6 people, and contact 3 at a time. That way, if someone refuses, you can contact the next person on your list.
Make sure to consider email etiquette when contacting potential interviewees.
•	Be respectful and formal in your language.
•	Introduce yourself and your purpose in writing.
•	Explain, briefly, your research study, what it’s for, and what you hope to better understand from this project.
•	Acknowledge that their time is valuable and ask them (politely!) if they aren’t able to participate, if they can recommend anyone else for it.
Here’s an example email below:


Dear NAME,
My name is _____________ and I am an undergraduate student majoring in ________________ at Pace University. I am writing to ask if I could interview you for a research study for my ENG 201 class on qualitative research and critical writing. The purpose of my research is to better understand how ________________________________.
What does the research involve?
My study consists of an interview conducted in person, over the phone, or via video conferencing (30 minutes). If you can’t meet for this interview, we could conduct it through a text modality, such as Twitter, WhatsApp, or texting.
This research is for a class assignment and will not be published.
If you are unable to participate, I would appreciate it if you could let me know of anyone who might be interested in participating, and who has knowledge or experience of the area of my research.
Thank you for your time and assistance! If you have any questions, please reach out.
Sincerely,
NAME


https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WDOQBPYEaNs




Summary https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6zhCkBCfj_M

# Interview Questions

Although the 3 interviews for our research project are due by Phase 3 of the assignment, I want you to begin thinking up your questions now so you have time to finalize them before you conduct the interviews later in the semester.



Interview Data = Results. Interview data doesn’t belong in the Methodology or the Literature Review; you’ll incorporate it into Phase 3, as the Project Guidelines, WID Cookbook, and video overviews note.

# Descriptive vs Analytical Writing

Now, consider the following questions and circle or underline where they appear in your own draft:

- What (language, topic, signpost, etc.) feels desperate and why?
- What looks like it's supposed to seem confident but maybe isn't, and why?
- What feels like the author's invested?
- What would you stake on this essay? (That is, is its quality so good you'd bet a million dollars on it?)


You are not responsible for reading any papers posted to Slack #workshop after Wednesday. If you post your draft late, you are still responsible for reviewing the other essays by Friday. You will submit your Phase 1 Draft 2 to the dropbox on Classes by 5pm on Friday. The peer review forms — one for each of your peers — are due by 5pm on Friday as well just to give you extra time in case you need it, but you should complete them as early as you are able.



Do reverse outlining from Abrams' chapter
https://open.oregonstate.education/goodargument/chapter/concepts-strategies-for-revision/


You’ll conduct interviews for the primary research component of the Qualitative Research Paper. Here are some things to consider with regards to qualitative interviewing.
An effective interview starts with a few (maybe 5-8) open-ended clear and unbiased questions that allow respondents to explore your topic in depth. Asking “how” or “why” questions almost always allow for this kind of exploration. “What” questions are trickier, but if they invite answers that are longer than one word or phrase, they can work well, too. Cluster questions around similar topics so your participants’ responses more easily flow from one to the next. A semi-structured interview approach might be preferred, where you have a few structured (scripted) questions and looser topics that permit follow-up or clarification questions after a respondent answers.





Coding involves highlighting recurring words, phrases, or themes and identifying their frequency and significance. The goal is to capture meaningful patterns without overcoding large chunks of text. 

STOP
Check out this pair of interviews: a Demo qualitative interview with mistakes and Demonstration Qualitative Interview - how it should be done, both done by Joanna Chrzanowska with I-TECH.


STOP
For information on writing, asking, and recording interview questions, check out Harvard’s [Strategies for Qualitative Interviews](https://sociology.fas.harvard.edu/files/sociology/files/interview_strategies.pdf). For examples, check out these sample student coded interview transcripts.


Stop! Write:
Once you have interviewed your participants and transcribed your interviews, begin coding them. You can code words, phrases, and a full sentence but avoid coding an entire paragraph or response with the same code. Aim to have most of the text coded—i.e., few words should be unmarked by the end of your coding cycle. Try the following to get started:
What words keep reappearing across the interview answers from all the participants? (Use color coding or the comment function to mark them.) Use them to name some codes!
What is the significance of these codes and how frequently they appear?
What themes keep reappearing across the interview answers from all the participants? How might you briefly describe them? (Use color coding or the comment function to mark them.) Use them to name some codes!
What is the significance of these codes and how frequently they appear?


# Exit Writing

🥳 Congratulations on getting through this chapter! Don't forget to check the [Calendar](https://visforvali.github.io/eng201-oer/){:target="_blank"} for the week's assignments, including your Tue question and Fri answer posts as well as any other assigned writing. Make sure to look ahead to future weeks as well to get a sense of when low- and high-stakes writing for Unit 1 is due.

# Reference List for This Week's Resources

Joanna Chrzanowska | [Demo Qualitative Interview with Mistakes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U4UKwd0KExc){:target="_blank"}
Joanna Chrzanowska | [Demonstration Qualitative Interview - How It Should Be Done](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNMTJTnrTQQ){:target="_blank"}
Harvard University | [Strategies for Qualitative Interviews](https://sociology.fas.harvard.edu/files/sociology/files/interview_strategies.pdf){:target="_blank"}
